00-schedule/WDI-11/code-snippets.md, before:

# Code Snippets From Lecture

### Arrays and For Loops
- printing and array with fencepost commas: <https://repl.it/Eegy/10>
- get maximum value: <https://repl.it/Eehp/1>
- getEvenNumbers: <https://repl.it/Ee6k/41>
- isAscending: <https://repl.it/Eeqy/22>
- isUnique: <https://repl.it/Eer8/3>

### Function Declarations
- Two function syntaxes: <https://repl.it/Ed0a/4>
- Stomping on function names: <https://repl.it/Ed0b/2>

### Intervals and Timeouts
- a simple interval, timeout counter: <https://repl.it/CqVJ>
- counting up with an interval: <https://repl.it/CqVJ>
- clearInterval with setTimeout: <https://repl.it/CqV8/2>

- ding, and stop ding: <https://repl.it/CqV8/2>
- cat meowing, dog barking: <https://repl.it/CqV8/3>

### Scopes and Closures
- scope example: <https://repl.it/CqS4/4>
- bank account closure: <https://repl.it/CqTA/2>
- bad vs good scope/closure examples: <https://repl.it/CqVY/2>

### Iterators
- .reduce() example: <https://repl.it/CqZD>
- .filter() .map() .reduce() in one breath: <https://repl.it/CqZH/0>

Commit message:

adding how-to-reset-dom repo to code snippets

00-schedule/WDI-11/code-snippets.md, after:

# Code Snippets From Lecture

### How to Reset DOM
Here's a repo that shows you several things:
- how to detect which elements are clicked on. 
- how to build a function that resets and initializes a page
- how to attach click handlers to newly created elements
- how to reset variables and manipulate the DOM back into
  some starting state.

Be sure to look at the [commit history](https://github.com/ga-students/how-to-reset-dom/commits/master)
to see how each step was completed.

<https://github.com/ga-students/how-to-reset-dom>

### Arrays and For Loops
- printing and array with fencepost commas: <https://repl.it/Eegy/10>
- get maximum value: <https://repl.it/Eehp/1>
- getEvenNumbers: <https://repl.it/Ee6k/41>
- isAscending: <https://repl.it/Eeqy/22>
- isUnique: <https://repl.it/Eer8/3>

### Function Declarations
- Two function syntaxes: <https://repl.it/Ed0a/4>
- Stomping on function names: <https://repl.it/Ed0b/2>

### Intervals and Timeouts
- a simple interval, timeout counter: <https://repl.it/CqVJ>
- counting up with an interval: <https://repl.it/CqVJ>
- clearInterval with setTimeout: <https://repl.it/CqV8/2>

- ding, and stop ding: <https://repl.it/CqV8/2>
- cat meowing, dog barking: <https://repl.it/CqV8/3>

### Scopes and Closures
- scope example: <https://repl.it/CqS4/4>
- bank account closure: <https://repl.it/CqTA/2>
- bad vs good scope/closure examples: <https://repl.it/CqVY/2>

### Iterators
- .reduce() example: <https://repl.it/CqZD>
- .filter() .map() .reduce() in one breath: <https://repl.it/CqZH/0>
