00-schedule/WDI-11/homework.md, before:

# Homework submission

<!--
Please submit the link(s) to the repo (github repository) with your homework (e.g. www.github.com/johndoe/css-homework) **[here](https://docs.google.com/a/generalassemb.ly/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScytvEQulwcqb0QEHk9PwN2-_DZEJG5Qeovv_erRjiTNLDObw/viewform).**

To keep your assignments neat, each piece of homework should have its own repo.
-->

### Week 7
| Day       | Topic                 | Lab                                                           |
| ---       | ---                   | -----                                                         |
| Monday    | No School             | No Homework                                                   |
| Tuesday   | Angular               | [Fruits and Veggies](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/fruits-and-veggies) |
| Wednesday | Angular               | [Route Those Views](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/angular-route-those-views) |

### Week 5
| Day       | Topic             | Homework                                                                 |
| ---       | ---               | -----                                                                    |
| Monday    | No Class          | No Homework                                                              |
| Tuesday   | 1:M Relationships | [Link Shortener](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/link-shortener)              |
| Wednesday | M:M Relationships | [Project Organize](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/express-project-organizer) |
| Thursday  | Auth              | No Homework                                                              |
| Friday    | Testing & Uploads | Work on Project!!                                                        |

### Week 4
| Day       | Topic                 | Homework                                                                                  |
| ---       | ---                   | -----                                                                                     |
| Monday    | SQL                   | [Apartment Database](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/apartment-database)                       |
| Tuesday   | CRUD, REST, Sequelize | [Daily Planet Part 1 GET, POST](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/express-daily-planet)        |
| Wednesday | CRUD, REST, Sequelize | [Daily Planet Part 2 PUT, DELETE](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/express-daily-planet-ajax) |
| Thursday  | Servers and DBs       | Hackathon: make your own CRUD app with a database                                         |
| Friday    | Servers and APIs      | [Pokedex](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/express-pokedex)                                     |

### Week 2
| Day       | Topic            | Homework                                                             |
| --        | ---              | -----                                                                |
| Monday    | jQuery           | [To-Do App](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/jquery-todo-list)             |
| Tuesday   | AJAX             | [Reddit Slideshow](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/ajax-reddit-slideshow) |
| Wednesday | Pair Programming | [Build a Quiz](https://github.com/brandiw/javascript-quiz)           |
| Thursday  | JS               | [Subtitles](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/subtitle-starter-code)        |

### Week 1
| Day       | Topic        | Homework                                                                              |
| ------    | -----        | --------                                                                              |
| Monday    | Terminal     | [Command Line Murder Mystery](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/command-line-murder-mystery) |
| Tuesday   | HTML and CSS | [CSS Positioning: Recreate Instagram](https://github.com/ga-students/css-positioning) |
| Wednesday | JavaScript   | [Temperature Convertor](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/temperature-converter-dom)         |
| Thursday  | JS Intervals | [JavaScript Clock Intervals](https://github.com/ga-students/js-clock-intervals)       |
| Friday    | Tic Tac Toe  | [Tic Tac Toe](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/tic-tac-toe)                                 |

Commit message:

adding labs and homework for python material

00-schedule/WDI-11/homework.md, after:

# Homework submission

<!--
Please submit the link(s) to the repo (github repository) with your homework (e.g. www.github.com/johndoe/css-homework) **[here](https://docs.google.com/a/generalassemb.ly/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScytvEQulwcqb0QEHk9PwN2-_DZEJG5Qeovv_erRjiTNLDObw/viewform).**

To keep your assignments neat, each piece of homework should have its own repo.
-->

### Week 10
| Day       | Topic                 | Lab                                                           |
| ---       | ---                   | -----                                                         |
| Monday    | Convert JS to Python  | [Arrays and for loop](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/python-arrays-and-for-loops)
| Tuesday   | Class Inheritance     | [Bank Accounts](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/python-bank-account-inheritance)

### Week 7
| Day       | Topic                 | Lab                                                           |
| ---       | ---                   | -----                                                         |
| Monday    | No School             | No Homework                                                   |
| Tuesday   | Angular               | [Fruits and Veggies](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/fruits-and-veggies) |
| Wednesday | Angular               | [Route Those Views](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/angular-route-those-views) |

### Week 5
| Day       | Topic             | Homework                                                                 |
| ---       | ---               | -----                                                                    |
| Monday    | No Class          | No Homework                                                              |
| Tuesday   | 1:M Relationships | [Link Shortener](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/link-shortener)              |
| Wednesday | M:M Relationships | [Project Organize](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/express-project-organizer) |
| Thursday  | Auth              | No Homework                                                              |
| Friday    | Testing & Uploads | Work on Project!!                                                        |

### Week 4
| Day       | Topic                 | Homework                                                                                  |
| ---       | ---                   | -----                                                                                     |
| Monday    | SQL                   | [Apartment Database](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/apartment-database)                       |
| Tuesday   | CRUD, REST, Sequelize | [Daily Planet Part 1 GET, POST](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/express-daily-planet)        |
| Wednesday | CRUD, REST, Sequelize | [Daily Planet Part 2 PUT, DELETE](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/express-daily-planet-ajax) |
| Thursday  | Servers and DBs       | Hackathon: make your own CRUD app with a database                                         |
| Friday    | Servers and APIs      | [Pokedex](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/express-pokedex)                                     |

### Week 2
| Day       | Topic            | Homework                                                             |
| --        | ---              | -----                                                                |
| Monday    | jQuery           | [To-Do App](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/jquery-todo-list)             |
| Tuesday   | AJAX             | [Reddit Slideshow](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/ajax-reddit-slideshow) |
| Wednesday | Pair Programming | [Build a Quiz](https://github.com/brandiw/javascript-quiz)           |
| Thursday  | JS               | [Subtitles](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/subtitle-starter-code)        |

### Week 1
| Day       | Topic        | Homework                                                                              |
| ------    | -----        | --------                                                                              |
| Monday    | Terminal     | [Command Line Murder Mystery](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/command-line-murder-mystery) |
| Tuesday   | HTML and CSS | [CSS Positioning: Recreate Instagram](https://github.com/ga-students/css-positioning) |
| Wednesday | JavaScript   | [Temperature Convertor](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/temperature-converter-dom)         |
| Thursday  | JS Intervals | [JavaScript Clock Intervals](https://github.com/ga-students/js-clock-intervals)       |
| Friday    | Tic Tac Toe  | [Tic Tac Toe](https://github.com/WDI-SEA/tic-tac-toe)                                 |
