16-react/intro-react/nested-students.md, before:

<img src="https://i.imgur.com/KBwhRtk.png">

# React "Students" Lab

## Intro

This lab will provide some practice doing the following:

- Creating a UI using a hierarchy of components
- Passing data as props from a parent to a child component
- Mapping arrays of data into arrays of components

## Setup

- Create a new react app called `nested-students`

## Minimum Requirements

**The layout and styling of the markup is left up to your discretion.**

1. Add a `students` value to the `<App>` component and initialize it with the following array of "student" data (similar to how we added a `post` object in Dino Blog):

```js
[
  {
    name: 'Cait Yomorta',
    bio: 'Lorem ipsum, dolor sit amet consectetur adipisicing elit. Natus placeat nostrum explicabo? Voluptatibus expedita saepe officia optio, commodi totam ratione laudantium ipsum porro molestias, quasi nulla minus vitae laboriosam corrupti Delectus inventore explicabo est odit incidunt rem a recusandae eum pariatur. Aperiam doloremque blanditiis harum voluptate animi fugit beatae asperiores quo, dignissimos sed illum veniam eum accusantium nulla quod voluptatum',
    scores: [
      {
        date: '2018-02-08',
        score: 77
      },
      {
        date: '2018-04-22',
        score: 92
      },
      {
        date: '2018-09-15',
        score: 68
      }
    ]
  },
  {
    name: 'Holly Baird',
    bio: 'Eum molestiae explicabo deserunt, maiores quod eaque omnis tenetur vero ducimus, magnam autem! Quia facere quaerat eum repudiandae dolorum eligendi iure quae. Eos id possimus accusantium, earum animi modi hic.',
    scores: [
      {
        date: '2018-12-14',
        score: 88
      },
      {
        date: '2019-01-09',
        score: 79
      },
      {
        date: '2019-02-23',
        score: 91
      },
      {
        date: '2019-03-01',
        score: 95
      }
    ]
  },
  {
    name: 'Wes Mungia',
    bio: 'Repudiandae veritatis recusandae quidem tenetur impedit, numquam incidunt enim, adipisci id cupiditate asperiores nam perferendis. Facere odit laborum ipsum autem repellendus natus eius doloremque ullam perferendis. Enim repellendus ut veniam?',
    scores: [
      {
        date: '2018-10-11',
        score: 62
      },
      {
        date: '2018-11-24',
        score: 74
      },
      {
        date: '2018-12-19',
        score: 85
      }
    ]
  }
]
```

2. Create a `<Roster />` component that you display within App (replace it's original JSX). (Don't forget to import Roster into `App.js`!) Pass `students` down to the Roster component as a prop.

3. Fill the Roster component with JSX to display a `<Student />` component for each student object in the `students` array. (Refer back to dino blog as an example of how to use map to do this.)

3. Create and code a `<Student />` component that:

	- Accepts a student object as a prop.
    	- Renders the student's `name` & `bio` properties.
	- Renders a `<Score>` component for each score object in the student's `scores` property.

4. Create and code the `<Score>` component so that it renders the score object's `date` & `score` properties.

**Solution:** https://github.com/WDI-SEA/nested-students-solution

Commit message:

added end result image and component diagram

16-react/intro-react/nested-students.md, after:

<img src="https://i.imgur.com/KBwhRtk.png">

# React "Students" Lab

## Intro

This lab will provide some practice doing the following:

- Creating a UI using a hierarchy of components
- Passing data as props from a parent to a child component
- Mapping arrays of data into arrays of components

## Setup

- Create a new react app called `nested-students`

## Plan
We're going to use react to display information about students based on a given array of those students. This will be the final result:

![End Result](https://res.cloudinary.com/doc2wnnmb/image/upload/v1638206056/Screen_Shot_2021-11-29_at_9.10.35_AM_a2z6bc.png)

Here is our component diagram:

![Component Diagram](https://res.cloudinary.com/doc2wnnmb/image/upload/v1638206204/Screen_Shot_2021-11-29_at_9.08.12_AM_hv12qu.png)

## Minimum Requirements

**The layout and styling of the markup is left up to your discretion.**

1. Add a `students` value to the `<App>` component and initialize it with the following array of "student" data (similar to how we added a `post` object in Dino Blog):

```js
[
  {
    name: 'Cait Yomorta',
    bio: 'Lorem ipsum, dolor sit amet consectetur adipisicing elit. Natus placeat nostrum explicabo? Voluptatibus expedita saepe officia optio, commodi totam ratione laudantium ipsum porro molestias, quasi nulla minus vitae laboriosam corrupti Delectus inventore explicabo est odit incidunt rem a recusandae eum pariatur. Aperiam doloremque blanditiis harum voluptate animi fugit beatae asperiores quo, dignissimos sed illum veniam eum accusantium nulla quod voluptatum',
    scores: [
      {
        date: '2018-02-08',
        score: 77
      },
      {
        date: '2018-04-22',
        score: 92
      },
      {
        date: '2018-09-15',
        score: 68
      }
    ]
  },
  {
    name: 'Holly Baird',
    bio: 'Eum molestiae explicabo deserunt, maiores quod eaque omnis tenetur vero ducimus, magnam autem! Quia facere quaerat eum repudiandae dolorum eligendi iure quae. Eos id possimus accusantium, earum animi modi hic.',
    scores: [
      {
        date: '2018-12-14',
        score: 88
      },
      {
        date: '2019-01-09',
        score: 79
      },
      {
        date: '2019-02-23',
        score: 91
      },
      {
        date: '2019-03-01',
        score: 95
      }
    ]
  },
  {
    name: 'Wes Mungia',
    bio: 'Repudiandae veritatis recusandae quidem tenetur impedit, numquam incidunt enim, adipisci id cupiditate asperiores nam perferendis. Facere odit laborum ipsum autem repellendus natus eius doloremque ullam perferendis. Enim repellendus ut veniam?',
    scores: [
      {
        date: '2018-10-11',
        score: 62
      },
      {
        date: '2018-11-24',
        score: 74
      },
      {
        date: '2018-12-19',
        score: 85
      }
    ]
  }
]
```

2. Create a `<Roster />` component that you display within App (replace it's original JSX). (Don't forget to import Roster into `App.js`!) Pass `students` down to the Roster component as a prop.

3. Fill the Roster component with JSX to display a `<Student />` component for each student object in the `students` array. (Refer back to dino blog as an example of how to use map to do this.)

3. Create and code a `<Student />` component that:

	- Accepts a student object as a prop.
    	- Renders the student's `name` & `bio` properties.
	- Renders a `<Score>` component for each score object in the student's `scores` property.

4. Create and code the `<Score>` component so that it renders the score object's `date` & `score` properties.

**Solution:** https://github.com/WDI-SEA/nested-students-solution
