16-react/intro-react/setup.md, before:

# Create React App

### Learning Objectives

_After this lesson, you will be able to:_

* Build a React app using `create-react-app`
* View `create-react-app` working locally

## Initial Setup

Let's jump right in! We'll create a skeleton React project and walk through it as we go.

An easy way to start React projects is to use a Terminal program called `create-react-app`. This excellent tool, created by Facebook, will help you set up a bare-bones React app instantly.

We'll call the example app "hello\_world", since that'll be our first project.

```bash
$ npx create-react-app hello_world
```

Read more about npx [here](https://medium.com/@maybekatz/introducing-npx-an-npm-package-runner-55f7d4bd282b).

The tool creates a new directory for your app, so move into it...

```bash
$ cd hello_world
```

Use `npm start` to start a server that will serve your new React application!

```bash
$ npm start
```

> You have now set up a Hello World app that you will continue working on during this lesson's exercises!

After running `$ npm start`, you can view the app at `http://localhost:3000`

> Note: If you ever need to stop the server, you can hit `ctrl-c` in the terminal window.

You'll notice the web page for our app automatically refreshes every time we save a file in the directory. This is an awesome feature of `create-react-app`!

You can look in the directory and see the structure that `create-react-app` provides for us. It looks like this:

```bash
├── README.md
├── package.json
├── public
│   ├── favicon.ico
│   └── index.html
└── src
    ├── App.css
    ├── App.js
    ├── App.test.js
    ├── index.css
    ├── index.js
    └── logo.svg
```

## Stop / Catch Up / Investigate

Take some time and look at what's been generated. Specifically pay attention to `src/App.js` and `src/index.js`

Make small changes to the code in `src/App.js`, `src/index.js`, and `public/index.html` just to see what happens.

Your basic React app is up and running. Now you're ready to add complexity.

Commit message:

added solution to an npm start error

16-react/intro-react/setup.md, after:

# Create React App

### Learning Objectives

_After this lesson, you will be able to:_

* Build a React app using `create-react-app`
* View `create-react-app` working locally

## Initial Setup

Let's jump right in! We'll create a skeleton React project and walk through it as we go.

An easy way to start React projects is to use a Terminal program called `create-react-app`. This excellent tool, created by Facebook, will help you set up a bare-bones React app instantly.

We'll call the example app "hello\_world", since that'll be our first project.

```bash
$ npx create-react-app hello_world
```

Read more about npx [here](https://medium.com/@maybekatz/introducing-npx-an-npm-package-runner-55f7d4bd282b).

The tool creates a new directory for your app, so move into it...

```bash
$ cd hello_world
```

Use `npm start` to start a server that will serve your new React application!

```bash
$ npm start
```

> You have now set up a Hello World app that you will continue working on during this lesson's exercises!

After running `$ npm start`, you can view the app at `http://localhost:3000`

> Note: If you ever need to stop the server, you can hit `ctrl-c` in the terminal window.

#### Troubleshooting: 

If you get an error when running `npm start` that says `Error: error:0308010C:digital envelope routines::unsupported`, you may be able to resolve the issue by changing the start script in your `package.json` from

```json
"start": "react-scripts start",
```
to the following:

```json
"start": "react-scripts --openssl-legacy-provider start"
```

## Stop / Catch Up / Investigate


You'll notice the web page for our app automatically refreshes every time we save a file in the directory. This is an awesome feature of `create-react-app`!

You can look in the directory and see the structure that `create-react-app` provides for us. It looks like this:

```bash
├── README.md
├── package.json
├── public
│   ├── favicon.ico
│   └── index.html
└── src
    ├── App.css
    ├── App.js
    ├── App.test.js
    ├── index.css
    ├── index.js
    └── logo.svg
```

Take some time and look at what's been generated. Specifically pay attention to `src/App.js` and `src/index.js`

Make small changes to the code in `src/App.js`, `src/index.js`, and `public/index.html` just to see what happens.

Your basic React app is up and running. Now you're ready to add complexity.
