15-python/python-classes/readme.md, before:

# Intro to Classes

##Objectives
* Understand difference between objects and classes
* Understand how classes are defined
* Understand how objects are initialized
* Understand instance variables and instance methods
* Understand class variables and class methods
* Utilize the `self` keyword
* Understand method chaining in a class

## Resources
Fork or clone this repo to gain access to a complete working end-product of
the examples in this lesson:

<https://github.com/WDI-SEA/python-class-examples>

# Classes
Python is an object oriented language. Object oriented languages allow us to
create things that act like physical objects in our day-to-day lives. Every day
we interact with objects like chairs, beverages, and CDs. These objects have
properties that define them, and they have things we can do with them.

If I were to describe the properties that make up coffee I drink I would say
each cup of coffee I drink has a `capacity`, a current `amount`. There's also
things I an do with each cup of coffee I drink. I can `fill` my cup. I can
`empty` my cup. I can `drink` some of my coffee. Python classes allow us to
model the properties of my coffee and define how I can interact with my coffee.

I'm not the only person who drinks coffee. A good class definition models what
a cup of coffee is for everyone. Then, we can use the class definition to create
**instances** of the class so I can my coffee, Sean can have his coffee and Brandi
can have her Coffee. Each **instance** of the coffee class can have a different
`capacity`, and keep track of different `amounts`. Although our coffees have
different properties the properties are affected by actions like `fill`, `empty`,
and `drink` similarly.

Here's what a Coffee class would look like in Python:

```python
class CoffeeCup():
  def __init__(self, capacity):
    self.capacity = capacity
    self.amount = 0
  
  def fill(self):
    self.amount = self.capacity
  
  def empty(self):
    self.amount = 0
  
  def drink(self, amount):
    self.amount -= amount
    if (self.amount == 0):
      self.amount = 0
```

The `CoffeeCup` is a collection of variables and methods. The variables in
this class are `self.capacity` and `self.amount`. The methods in this class
are `fill`, `empty`, and `drink`. The `__init__` method is a special method
Python executes when a new cup of coffee is created.

The `self` keyword is similar to the `this` keyword in JavaScript. The `self`
keyword allow each instance of a `CoffeeCup` to know what it's own capacity is
and what it's own current amount is.

Create instances of a class by calling `ClassName()`. This invokes the
`__init__` method. You can pass parameters to it too, `ClassName(param1, param2)`.

Here's how Steve, Sean and Brandi could each have their own cup of coffee. Let's
assume the `capacity` and `amount` units are all in ounces.

```python
steves_cup = CoffeeCup(12)  # a fancy latte.
sean_cup = CoffeeCup(16)    # gas station drip.
brandis_cup = CoffeeCup(2)  # a quick espresso.
```

Each of our cups start empty and have their own capacity. Let's fill the cups,
have everyone take a 1 ounce drink, and print the amount left in each cup.

```python
steves_cup.fill()
seans_cup.fill()
brandis_cup.fill()

steves_cup.drink(1)
seans_cup.drink(1)
brandis_cup.drink(1)

print(steves_cup.amount, "ounces left")
print(seans_cup.amount, "ounces left")
print(brandis_cup.amount, "ounces left")
```

That's the basics of how to create and interact with objects in Python!

## Exercise: Create Your Own Class
Write a `BankAccount` class.
* Bank accounts should be created with the `kind` of account (like "savings" or "checking").
* Each account should keep track of it's current `balance`.
* Each account should have access to a `deposit` and a `withdraw` method.
* Each account should start with a `balance` set to zero.
* return the amount withdrawn, for convenience

Create a checking account and a savings account. Withdraw money from the savings
account and deposit that amount into the checking account.

Bonus: start each account with an additional `overdraft_fees` property that
starts at zero. If a call to `withdraw` ends with the `balance` below zero
then `overdraft_fees` should be incremented by twenty.

```python
class BankAccount():
  def __init__(self, kind):
    self.kind = kind
    self.balance = 0
    self.overdraft_fees = 0
  
  def deposit(self, amount):
    self.balance += amount
  
  def withdraw(self, amount):
    self.amount -= amount
    if (self.amount < 0):
      self.overdraft_fees += 20
    return amount
```

## Default Parameters
Python allows us to provide default values for parameters in any function we
provide. Let's write a `Point` class that has `x` and `y` variables. If no
`x` and `y` values are provided when a `Point` is initialized `x` and `y`
should both default to zero.

Add a method called `distance` that calculates and returns the distance between
the current point and the origin. Use the mathematical distance formula where
the distance between a point and the origin is defined as the square root of
(x*x + y*y).

Use Python's exponent `**` operator to calculate square root. `9 ** .5 == 3.0`

```
p0 = Point()
p2 = Point(3, 4)

print(p0.distance())
0.0

print(p2.distance())
5.0
```

## Printing Objects
Ever tried to have Python print an object? It's nasty. If you try to print an
object Python will print a representation of the object where you'll see what
type of an object it is and it will show you a number representing something
about where the object exists in memory, which we don't care about.

```python
print(p0)
<__main__.Point object at 0x107335630>
```

We can write a special method `__str__` that Python will call when an
object is printed or turned in to a string. Customizing this method in our
classes makes our programs much easier to interact with.

Notice that Python goes out of it's way to improve the readability of code.
Any method that looks like `__init__` or `__str__` with underscores has a
special purpose in the language. Python uses the underscores to make it
immediately clear that *this is where the magic happens!*

Let's define a `__str__` method in our `Point` class that will print out
points like we're used to seeing points. `p0` in the example above should
appear as "(0,0)" and `p2` in the example above should appear as "(3,4)".

```python
class Point():
  def __init__(self, x=0, y=0):
    self.x = x
    self.y = y
  
  def __str__(self):
    return "({},{})".format(self.x, self.y)
  
  def distance(self):
    return (self.x ** 2 + self.y ** 2) ** .5
```

Now we can create points and when we print those objects we see something
pretty printed instead of the garbly-goop we saw before.

```python
p0 = Point()
p2 = Point(3, 4)

print(p0)
(0,0)

print(p2)
(3,4)
```

## Class Variables
In our `CoffeeCup` example and the `BankAccount` example and in our `Point`
example each class has variables attached to the `self` property that exist
independently for each object that's created. We can also attach variables
to the class itself so that there's one single thing that exists for an entire
class. These are called **class variables**.

For the `Point` class we'll create a class variable to represent `ORIGIN`.
Class variables are available even without creating any instances of a class.
We'll be able to write code that references `Point.ORIGIN` by itself.

Change the `distance` method to accept a reference to a second Point as an
optional parameter. The second point parameter should have a default value
of `Point.ORIGIN`.

```python
class Point():
  ORIGIN = Point()
  
  def __init__(self, x=0, y=0):
    self.x = x
    self.y = y
  
  def __str__(self):
    return "({},{})".format(self.x, self.y)
  
  def distance(self, p2=Point.ORIGIN):
    dx = self.x - p2.x
    dy = self.y - p2.y
    return (dx ** 2 + dy ** 2) ** .5
```

```python
# we can access ORIGIN through the Point class.
print(Point.ORIGIN)
(0,0)

p1 = Point(3,4)
p2 = Point(3,19)

# Distance defaults to calculating how far away a Point is from ORIGIN
p1.distance()
5.0

# Distance will calculate the distance from one point to another if a
# a second Point is provided as a parameter.
p1.distance(p2)
15.0
```

# Final Thoughts
Classes are an excellent example of how the Python programming language has
benefitted from thorough design and community development. JavaScript was first
created in 10 days by one person. Creating classes in JavaScript is a total
pain. JavaScript is only recently gaining full-fledged, easy-to-use
Object Oriented programming features that Python has had for a long time.

Commit message:

fixing variable name. attaching Point.ORIGIN after class definition

15-python/python-classes/readme.md, after:

# Intro to Classes

##Objectives
* Understand difference between objects and classes
* Understand how classes are defined
* Understand how objects are initialized
* Understand instance variables and instance methods
* Understand class variables and class methods
* Utilize the `self` keyword
* Understand method chaining in a class

## Resources
Fork or clone this repo to gain access to a complete working end-product of
the examples in this lesson:

<https://github.com/WDI-SEA/python-class-examples>

# Classes
Python is an object oriented language. Object oriented languages allow us to
create things that act like physical objects in our day-to-day lives. Every day
we interact with objects like chairs, beverages, and CDs. These objects have
properties that define them, and they have things we can do with them.

If I were to describe the properties that make up coffee I drink I would say
each cup of coffee I drink has a `capacity`, a current `amount`. There's also
things I an do with each cup of coffee I drink. I can `fill` my cup. I can
`empty` my cup. I can `drink` some of my coffee. Python classes allow us to
model the properties of my coffee and define how I can interact with my coffee.

I'm not the only person who drinks coffee. A good class definition models what
a cup of coffee is for everyone. Then, we can use the class definition to create
**instances** of the class so I can my coffee, Sean can have his coffee and Brandi
can have her Coffee. Each **instance** of the coffee class can have a different
`capacity`, and keep track of different `amounts`. Although our coffees have
different properties the properties are affected by actions like `fill`, `empty`,
and `drink` similarly.

Here's what a Coffee class would look like in Python:

```python
class CoffeeCup():
  def __init__(self, capacity):
    self.capacity = capacity
    self.amount = 0
  
  def fill(self):
    self.amount = self.capacity
  
  def empty(self):
    self.amount = 0
  
  def drink(self, amount):
    self.amount -= amount
    if (self.amount == 0):
      self.amount = 0
```

The `CoffeeCup` is a collection of variables and methods. The variables in
this class are `self.capacity` and `self.amount`. The methods in this class
are `fill`, `empty`, and `drink`. The `__init__` method is a special method
Python executes when a new cup of coffee is created.

The `self` keyword is similar to the `this` keyword in JavaScript. The `self`
keyword allow each instance of a `CoffeeCup` to know what it's own capacity is
and what it's own current amount is.

Create instances of a class by calling `ClassName()`. This invokes the
`__init__` method. You can pass parameters to it too, `ClassName(param1, param2)`.

Here's how Steve, Sean and Brandi could each have their own cup of coffee. Let's
assume the `capacity` and `amount` units are all in ounces.

```python
steves_cup = CoffeeCup(12)  # a fancy latte.
seans_cup = CoffeeCup(16)    # gas station drip.
brandis_cup = CoffeeCup(2)  # a quick espresso.
```

Each of our cups start empty and have their own capacity. Let's fill the cups,
have everyone take a 1 ounce drink, and print the amount left in each cup.

```python
steves_cup.fill()
seans_cup.fill()
brandis_cup.fill()

steves_cup.drink(1)
seans_cup.drink(1)
brandis_cup.drink(1)

print(steves_cup.amount, "ounces left")
print(seans_cup.amount, "ounces left")
print(brandis_cup.amount, "ounces left")
```

That's the basics of how to create and interact with objects in Python!

## Exercise: Create Your Own Class
Write a `BankAccount` class.
* Bank accounts should be created with the `kind` of account (like "savings" or "checking").
* Each account should keep track of it's current `balance`.
* Each account should have access to a `deposit` and a `withdraw` method.
* Each account should start with a `balance` set to zero.
* return the amount withdrawn, for convenience

Create a checking account and a savings account. Withdraw money from the savings
account and deposit that amount into the checking account.

Bonus: start each account with an additional `overdraft_fees` property that
starts at zero. If a call to `withdraw` ends with the `balance` below zero
then `overdraft_fees` should be incremented by twenty.

```python
class BankAccount():
  def __init__(self, kind):
    self.kind = kind
    self.balance = 0
    self.overdraft_fees = 0
  
  def deposit(self, amount):
    self.balance += amount
  
  def withdraw(self, amount):
    self.amount -= amount
    if (self.amount < 0):
      self.overdraft_fees += 20
    return amount
```

## Default Parameters
Python allows us to provide default values for parameters in any function we
provide. Let's write a `Point` class that has `x` and `y` variables. If no
`x` and `y` values are provided when a `Point` is initialized `x` and `y`
should both default to zero.

Add a method called `distance` that calculates and returns the distance between
the current point and the origin. Use the mathematical distance formula where
the distance between a point and the origin is defined as the square root of
(x*x + y*y).

Use Python's exponent `**` operator to calculate square root. `9 ** .5 == 3.0`

```
p0 = Point()
p2 = Point(3, 4)

print(p0.distance())
0.0

print(p2.distance())
5.0
```

## Printing Objects
Ever tried to have Python print an object? It's nasty. If you try to print an
object Python will print a representation of the object where you'll see what
type of an object it is and it will show you a number representing something
about where the object exists in memory, which we don't care about.

```python
print(p0)
<__main__.Point object at 0x107335630>
```

We can write a special method `__str__` that Python will call when an
object is printed or turned in to a string. Customizing this method in our
classes makes our programs much easier to interact with.

Notice that Python goes out of it's way to improve the readability of code.
Any method that looks like `__init__` or `__str__` with underscores has a
special purpose in the language. Python uses the underscores to make it
immediately clear that *this is where the magic happens!*

Let's define a `__str__` method in our `Point` class that will print out
points like we're used to seeing points. `p0` in the example above should
appear as "(0,0)" and `p2` in the example above should appear as "(3,4)".

```python
class Point():
  def __init__(self, x=0, y=0):
    self.x = x
    self.y = y
  
  def __str__(self):
    return "({},{})".format(self.x, self.y)
  
  def distance(self):
    return (self.x ** 2 + self.y ** 2) ** .5
```

Now we can create points and when we print those objects we see something
pretty printed instead of the garbly-goop we saw before.

```python
p0 = Point()
p2 = Point(3, 4)

print(p0)
(0,0)

print(p2)
(3,4)
```

## Class Variables
In our `CoffeeCup` example and the `BankAccount` example and in our `Point`
example each class has variables attached to the `self` property that exist
independently for each object that's created. We can also attach variables
to the class itself so that there's one single thing that exists for an entire
class. These are called **class variables**.

For the `Point` class we'll create a class variable to represent `ORIGIN`.
Class variables are available even without creating any instances of a class.
We'll be able to write code that references `Point.ORIGIN` by itself.

Change the `distance` method to accept a reference to a second Point as an
optional parameter. The second point parameter should have a default value
of `None`. We will write an if statement to detect when p2 is `None` and
set it to `Point.ORIGIN` instead.

It's hard to reference the `Point` class in the class definition itself because
it hasn't finished being created yet. We'll attach `ORIGIN` to the `Point`
class after it's defined.

```python
class Point():
  def __init__(self, x=0, y=0):
    self.x = x
    self.y = y
  
  def __str__(self):
    return "({},{})".format(self.x, self.y)
  
  def distance(self, p2=None):
    if p2 is None:
      p2 = Point.ORIGIN
    dx = self.x - p2.x
    dy = self.y - p2.y
    return (dx ** 2 + dy ** 2) ** .5

# attach ORIGIN after the Point class is defined
Point.ORIGIN = Point()
```

```python
# we can access ORIGIN through the Point class.
print(Point.ORIGIN)
(0,0)

p1 = Point(3,4)
p2 = Point(3,19)

# Distance defaults to calculating how far away a Point is from ORIGIN
p1.distance()
5.0

# Distance will calculate the distance from one point to another if a
# a second Point is provided as a parameter.
p1.distance(p2)
15.0
```

# Final Thoughts
Classes are an excellent example of how the Python programming language has
benefitted from thorough design and community development. JavaScript was first
created in 10 days by one person. Creating classes in JavaScript is a total
pain. JavaScript is only recently gaining full-fledged, easy-to-use
Object Oriented programming features that Python has had for a long time.
