00-config-deployment/installfest/osx/unit-4.md, before:

# Unit 4  OSX installfest

We are going to need to:
1. install `python3` and `pip3` with homebrew
1. alias the `python` an `pip` commands in our `.zshrc` (zshell config file) to point to python3 instead of python2.

#### Installing `python3` and `pip3`

We will be using homebrew to install and manage python3.

___

Tell homebrew to install python with the following command: 

```bash
brew install python
```

Afterwards, run the following command:

```bash
python3 --version
```

If this command returns a version lower than `Python 3.9.2`, tell homebrew to update python with this command:

```bash
brew upgrade python
```

Python uses `pip` as the package manager, similar to how node.js uses `npm`

Double check that `pip3` has been installed on your system with the following command:

```bash
pip3 --version
```

If zshell tells you `pip3` is a command not found, reach out to a dev to troubleshoot this bug. I am putting [this stack overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/47255517/brew-install-python3-didnt-install-pip3) here in case it is helpful to debug this issue for anyone.

### Additional Setup

Everyone needs to install the following things, regardless of thier operating system.

1. install a couple global python packages with `pip3`
1. install a vscode extension for python

#### Installing Global Packages 

We are going to make sure we have `virtualenv` installed, which is how `pip` manages package versioning in python projects.

We also are going to install `ipython`, which is a tricked out version of the python shell.

___


check to make sure you have virtualenv installed with the following command:

```bash
virtualenv --version
```

if nothing is found, use `pip install virtualenv` ot install virtualenv

run the following command to install ipython, which is a tricked out python shell:

```bash
pip3 install ipython
```

#### Vscode python Extension

everyone should install [this python vscode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.vscode-pylance)

Commit message:

removes old python install from python section and merges it w unit 4 install

00-config-deployment/installfest/osx/unit-4.md, after:

# Unit 4  OSX installfest

We are going to need to:
1. install `python3` and `pip3` with homebrew
1. alias the `python` an `pip` commands in our `.zshrc` (zshell config file) to point to python3 instead of python2.

### Python 2 vs. Python 3 -- A Auick Note

Note: there are two versions of Python. There's Python 2 and Python 3. Python 3 was released in 2008 and included breaking changes. Breaking changes means that an upgrade changes the way some code works and old code won't always work with the way new code wants it to be written.

Why did Python 3 introduce breaking changes? Well, it turns out there were some things in Python 2 that could have been designed better. Guido, and the Python community decided that it would be worth it, in the long haul, to fix those mistakes and get the language back on track for where they want it to be in the future. Upgrading to Python 3 is a good thing!

Wait, so if upgrading to Python 3 is a good thing, why are some people still using Python 2?

It turns out that converting some code from Python 2 to Python 3 is hard and requires lots of work. It's easy to convert small projects from Python 2 to Python 3, but it's hard to convert large, complex projects. In an ideal world everyone would be able to convert their projects and Python 2 would be laid down to rest. In reality, lots of large, popular projects started being written in Python 2 and they just don't have the resources \(or incentives\) to upgrade to Python 3.

To us, the differences between Python 2 and Python 3 are minimal. They're very much still the same language. Anyone that knows either Python 2 or Python 3 is able to switch to using the other easily.

Perhaps the most notable difference is how you print things.

#### Installing `python3` and `pip3`

We will be using homebrew to install and manage python3.

___

Tell homebrew to install python with the following command: 

```bash
brew install python
```

Afterwards, run the following command:

```bash
python3 --version
```

If this command returns a version lower than `Python 3.9.2`, tell homebrew to update python with this command:

```bash
brew upgrade python
```

Python uses `pip` as the package manager, similar to how node.js uses `npm`

Double check that `pip3` has been installed on your system with the following command:

```bash
pip3 --version
```

If zshell tells you `pip3` is a command not found, reach out to a dev to troubleshoot this bug. I am putting [this stack overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/47255517/brew-install-python3-didnt-install-pip3) here in case it is helpful to debug this issue for anyone.

### Additional Setup

Everyone needs to install the following things, regardless of thier operating system.

1. install a couple global python packages with `pip3`
1. install a vscode extension for python

#### Installing Global Packages 

We are going to make sure we have `virtualenv` installed, which is how `pip` manages package versioning in python projects.

We also are going to install `ipython`, which is a tricked out version of the python shell.

___


check to make sure you have virtualenv installed with the following command:

```bash
virtualenv --version
```

if nothing is found, use `pip install virtualenv` ot install virtualenv

run the following command to install ipython, which is a tricked out python shell:

```bash
pip3 install ipython
```

#### Vscode python Extension

everyone should install [this python vscode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-python.vscode-pylance)
